Welcome everyone, my name is Jen Kramer.
Today, we are going to be talking about
HTML semantics and CSS specificity and
selectors.
So we have a lot of topics to cover today,
we're gonna talk all about the various
types of semantic HTML that can
hopefully introduce you to a few elements
you might not have heard before.
We're going to talk a lot about CSS
selectors and forming them, and
what they mean.
We're even going to get to some of
the new ones like where n is and has, and
some other various ones along the way,
we're gonna talk about inheritance,
specificity, and the cascade.
So these are the three most
misunderstood concepts in CSS.
And as such, this is really a course
about mechanics of CSS as opposed
to how to make things pretty, and
so more on that in just a moment.
So as you follow along here,
the course website is
at semantics-selectors.css.education.
Everything that I talked about today will
be there including a copy of the slides,
all of the code pins that we're going
to work with, and links to GitHub.
We'll actually only use GitHub and VS Code
towards the end of the course, where we
get to the cascade and we have to talk
about different sources for stylesheets.
Other than that, we're just pretty
much going to work in CodePen today.
So as I said,
this is a course on CSS mechanics.
And I have a number of other courses here
in the front-end masters library if you
want to work more on making it pretty.
So if you wanna work on that,
making it pretty stuff,
the getting started with CSS course sounds
pretty simple, it is a project-based
course where we start with an Adobe XD,
picture of how the site should look.
We break it down into smaller pieces, and
we put together the whole
webpage as a portfolio site.
We're not really going to focus so
much on layouts or responsive design,
they come up peripherally, but
it's not a focus of this course,
if you want to learn more about that,
I have a course called CSS Grid and
Flexbox for
responsive layouts version two.
If you watch my initial version of it,
it was from like five years ago,
the new version is completely updated
with all kinds of new material, and
you will learn new things in that one.
And then, finally, advanced techniques in
web dev specifically related to HTML and
CSS, I have a course on that as well,
the advanced CSS layouts course.
And, of course, that is from 2019, so
it's not going to have the very latest CSS
selectors in it, but it does cover things
like CSS variables and calkin, doing all
kinds of crazy math to create different
kinds of layouts for webpages, okay?
Hopefully, that gives everybody a pretty
good overview of where else you can go if
there are other things you
wanna learn about CSS.
So let's start with what I see on Twitter
and probably what you see on Twitter too,
which is that <div> is totally awesome and
we don't need anything else.
It just does everything we need it to do,
maybe the only other element
that we need is a span element.
And there is a place for
absolutely everything on the web,
you can find excuses to do absolutely
anything with the right kind of website.
Even though, that blinking spinning stuff
does a really great thing on a hypnotist's
website, so yes,
there may be plenty of use for
divs and spans, but
there are better ways of doing things.
And we should be making those choices
because HTML and CSS are two-thirds of
the front-end, when we ignore them in
favor of just JavaScript, you're ignoring
two-thirds of the tools that you have to
work with when working on the front-end.
Other things that I hear online and
Twitter are that pick div and
span are good enough to give me everything
that I want, and HTML styling sucks.
I agree with you, we'll talk about
how we can get around that today.
HTML is a relic of the 90s and we should
redesign the web to get rid of it,
good luck with that,
30 years after launch.
HTML and CSS should be in JavaScript,
I'll show you why they shouldn't.
And also, code should be efficient and
performant, Mine is.
A lot of people like to hinge on the topic
of performance as to why their JavaScript
is superior, and that HTML and CSS
are somehow dragging down the webpage, but
they are probably not the source
of your multi-megabyte files and
all of the things that have to
execute to make your webpage work.
I also hear things like CSS is stupid,
it's unpredictable,
I never know what I'm going to get.
I hope that by the end of today that
will no longer be an issue for you,
it is very predictable, you can indeed
predict what you're going to get.
Specificity and the cascade should die.
They are one of the most wonderful parts
of CSS once you understand how they work
and how to leverage them, it's amazing
the tricks that you can do with CSS.
And long live classes,
the only part of CSS that makes sense,
yes, classes are very useful on occasion.
But I'm going to show you that
when you expand your repertoire
in terms of CSS selectors that
are based on HTML semantics,
you actually expand your depth of
what you can do on the front-end.
You stick to just classes and divs and
spans, it's like having an old whole
orchestra, but we're just gonna
focus on the violin section.
Let's focus on the whole range and
depth of what we can do.
And then, finally, CSS selectors are
deficient or performant like my classes,
this has also been debunked,
I have some references for you on this,
you can go do some more reading.
If your page is not performing well,
a good place to sort of resize your
images and all of the stuff
that's in your JavaScript files.
Probably, those are going to be the things
that are causing your page to slow down
long before your HTML and CSS.
So as a result, because people put so
much emphasis on JavaScript, so
little emphasis on HTML and CSS,
we wind up with examples like this,
this is a CodePen that codes a link.
And look how much code we had
to write in order to code a link
because we did not know
the a element in HTML.
And we have made it even accessible here
with our roll designation and so forth.
I'm not saying this is good code but
this is why this happens,
because people do not understand HTML and
do not know what's available to them.
A good analogy to this is if we think
about the construction industry
in a very high level,
we start with architecture and planning.
They go in and play in a building,
they pass it over to the construction
people via blueprints.
The blueprints describe
what is going to be built,
the construction people actually build it.
If you take a look,
the architecture and planning and
the blueprints are on one
side of this equation,
the blueprints are the product
of what they do when they plan.
And the construction people that is
where they start, so they overlap,
they're in the middle of blueprints.
The same thing is true here when we think
about the continuum of web development,
we start with UX and UI and writing
content, then we go into HTML, CSS, and
JavaScript, and so on and so forth.
We have the same kind
of overlaps happening.
We tend to think of UX UI and
content all together as a unit.
So those people
are producing this content,
along with their Figma prototypes and
whatever else, they're gonna pass that
on over to the development team that
are going to put these things together.
The overlapping part in the middle
is the content of the webpage.
Content is the moment that we transition
from planning a website
into building that website.
And so we as developers, have a really
bad habit of not reading the content.
It is whatever it is, we don't care
because we are so busy writing the code,
and we are all guilty
of this including me.
I would actually start to argue at
this point in time that content may
be better delivered if it's actually
marked up by the UX UI team first,
and then pass to the development team.
And the reason why is we wind up
getting more semantics into it.
And, of course, the development team
could add any additional dudes or
classes that are needed in order to
completely lay out the page and so forth.